Request for Extension of IRAD Funding
Network Automata and Emergent Phenomena
(I524L.0.0.0.3, concluded 10/31/2018)

This IRAD project was initially funded at $15,000, for a period of performance
ending October 31, 2018. I write to request a funding extension of $15,000, to
cover additional research over a period ending March 31, 2019.


Project Summary:

Simple network automata, similar to cellular machines but using a notion of
adjacency defined topologically rather than geometrically, are defined and
simulated under a variety of initial conditions and generation rules.
Their operation is characterized statistically, over large aggregates of simu-
lation outcome data, and analytically, by inspection of noteworthy cases.
The research objective is to assess the potential of these and similar
machines to serve in novel models of natural and social processes.
By-products include a toolset with extended usefulness and the accumulation
of a base of familiarity with, and knowledge in, the domain.


Accomplished to date:

- Defined a abstract, rule-based graph automaton for study*

- Built an extensible simulator
    - for the target machine
    - for a like-structured, randomly operating machine (for comparative analyses)

- Created an automated workflow and data base for generating and storing
simulation results in volume.

- Captured outcome statistics from several million simulation runs.

- Observed the emergence of order and structure out of random graphs, 
using varied generation rules, as measured for entropy, clustering, degree
distribution, and other network qualities. Noted relatively low sensitivity to
changes in initial conditions.

- Failed to see among the machine-evolved graphs the "scale-free" degree
distribution that characterizes many natural and man-made systems.


Additional funding would support labor by the primary researcher and GTRI
collaborators to:

- Gauge the ability of machine learning methods to predict a machine's
behavior, given its initial rule-parameter.

- Determine the applicability of mathematical constructs such as
the sandpile model to machine characteristics.

- Explore search strategies within the machine's discrete, irregular,
8-dimensional rule-space for rules producing desirable behaviors.


Contact Information:

    Richard Foard (offices CRB 279A, WF 910)
    richard.foard@gtri.gatech.edu
    404-281-3487


* A detailed machine description is attached.
